Development Guide
=================

This document is a guide for developers who want to contribute to the project.

Environment setup
-----------------

Clone the repository
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: console

    git clone git@github.com:newton-physics/newton.git
    cd newton

Using uv
^^^^^^^^

`uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/>`_ is a Python package and project manager.

Install uv:

.. code-block:: console

    # On macOS and Linux.
    curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

    # On Windows.
    powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"

Run basic examples:

.. code-block:: console

    # An example with basic dependencies
    uv run newton/examples/example_quadruped.py

    # An example that requires extras
    uv run --all-extras newton/examples/example_humanoid.py

Updating all dependencies in the project `lockfile <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/concepts/projects/layout/#the-lockfile>`__,
remember to commit ``uv.lock`` after running:

.. code-block:: console

    uv lock -U

Using venv
^^^^^^^^^^

These instructions are meant for users who wish to set up a development environment using `venv <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`__
or Conda (e.g. from `Miniforge <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>`__).

.. code-block:: console

    python -m venv .venv

    # On macOS and Linux.
    source .venv/bin/activate
    
    # On Windows (console).
    .venv\Scripts\activate.bat

    # On Windows (PowerShell).
    .venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1

Installing dependencies including optional ones:

.. code-block:: console

    python -m pip install mujoco --pre -f https://py.mujoco.org/
    python -m pip install warp-lang --pre -U -f https://pypi.nvidia.com/warp-lang/
    python -m pip install git+https://github.com/google-deepmind/mujoco_warp.git@main
    python -m pip install -e .[dev]

Run basic examples:

.. code-block:: console

    # An example with basic dependencies
    python newton/examples/example_quadruped.py

    # An example that requires extras
    python newton/examples/example_humanoid.py

Running the tests
-----------------

The Newton test suite can be run with ``uv run -m newton.tests`` or ``python -m newton.tests``.
By default, the test suite execution will be parallelized on up to eight processes.
Pass the ``--help`` flag to see the available options for the test runner.

Some tests use optional dependencies like `usd-core <https://pypi.org/project/usd-core/>`__ and
will be skipped if they are not installed.

When using uv, the test suite can be run with all extras installed by running:

.. code-block:: console

    uv run --all-extras -m newton.tests

When using venv, the extras for the test suite can be installed by running ``python -m pip install -e .[dev]``
from the root of the repository.

A code coverage report requires installing ``coverage[toml]`` and can be generated by appending the
``--coverage --coverage-html`` flags to the test command, e.g.

.. code-block:: console

    uv run --all-extras -m newton.tests --coverage --coverage-html htmlcov

The file ``htmlcov/index.html`` can be opened with a web browser to view the coverage report.

Golden State Tests
------------------

Some tests compare simulation results against "golden states" (pre-recorded ``.npz`` files).
If these tests fail, you might need to regenerate the golden states.

To regenerate golden states, run:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv
    uv run newton/tests/goldenstate_utils.py

    # With venv
    python newton/tests/goldenstate_utils.py


A golden state test failure indicates a discrepancy between the current simulation output and the stored golden state. This can occur for a few reasons:

1.  **Bug Introduced**: A code change may have introduced a bug. This should be fixed.
2.  **Numerical Drift**: Minor, legitimate changes might cause small numerical differences.
    If so, regenerate the golden states (see command above). You might also consider
    adjusting test tolerances in ``newton/tests/test_solvers_on_examples.py``.
3.  **Intentional Behavior Change**: If the simulation's behavior has correctly changed,
    the golden states are outdated and must be regenerated (see command above).

When a test fails, the error message provides details. It's often helpful to
interactively run and visually inspect the failing example to understand the
discrepancy before deciding on the appropriate action.

Code formatting and linting
---------------------------

`Ruff <https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/>`_ is used for Python linting and code formatting.
`pre-commit <https://pre-commit.com/>`_ can be used to ensure that local code complies with Newton's checks.
From the top of the repository, run:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv installed
    uvx pre-commit run -a

    # With venv
    python -m pip install pre-commit
    pre-commit run -a

To automatically run pre-commit hooks with ``git commit``:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv installed
    uvx pre-commit install

    # With venv
    pre-commit install

The hooks can be uninstalled with ``pre-commit uninstall``.

Building the documentation
--------------------------

Here are a few ways to build the documentation.

Using uv
^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: console

    rm -rf docs/_build
    uv run --extra docs sphinx-build -W -b html docs docs/_build/html

    # Alternatively using the Makefile
    uv sync --extra docs
    source .venv/bin/activate
    cd docs
    make clean
    make html

Using venv
^^^^^^^^^^

.. code-block:: console

    python -m pip install -e .[docs]
    python -m sphinx -W -b html docs docs/_build/html

    # Alternatively using the Makefile
    cd docs
    make clean
    make html

Testing documentation code snippets
-----------------------------------

The ``doctest`` Sphinx builder is used to ensure that code snippets in the documentation remains up-to-date.

The doctests can be run with:

.. code-block:: console

    # With uv installed
    uv run --extra docs sphinx-build -W -b doctest docs docs/_build/doctest

    # With venv
    python -m sphinx -W -b doctest docs docs/_build/doctest

For more information, see the `sphinx.ext.doctest <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/doctest.html>`__
documentation.

Packaging
---------

To build a ``.whl`` file (e.g. to test the creation of a
`distribution package <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/glossary/#term-Distribution-Package>`__), run:

.. code-block:: console

    uv build --wheel

The output will be placed in the ``dist/`` subdirectory.
